[lldb][docs] Add hardware feature considerations to target doc (#211213)
llvm/llvm-project: lldb/docs/resources/addingtargetsupport.md

having some set of results to measure progress is very important.
Sometimes a change will get one test to pass, sometimes hundreds, and it
is easy to regress if you are not careful.

## Target Hardware Features

Some hardware features can make porting easier or harder. Below is a
non-exhaustive list of features and their impacts on porting LLDB.

### Hardware Single Step

If the target lacks this feature, you will have to implement software single

> stepping. Which is much more complex and involves emulating any instruction that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stepping. This is much more complex and involves emulating any instruction that
```

Author: Done.

For example, an atomic sequence may implement an atomic operation by looping
until success. When stepping through the sequence normally, this check will
always fail (due to the debug exceptions) and cause it to loop forever.

You can teach LLDB to find the sequence start point, and replay the whole thing
as if it were one step.

If you have instruction bundles, check how breakpoints behave and where in the
bundles they can be placed.

### Single Instruction Equivalents of Sequences

The opposite of the previous point. If your target has single instructions
for what is normally a sequence, this reduces the work needed in LLDB. Single
instruction atomics are a common example.

### Runtime Register Resizing

Anything like AArch64's Scalable Vector Extension (SVE) registers. At each stop
event the registers may have a different size.

Support for this is currently SVE specific as it requires `lldb` to know which
registers scale and what to derive their size from.

### Registers That Come And Go At Runtime

Anything like AArch64's Scalable Matrix Extension (SME) `ZA` register. This
register can be switched off when not in use. At the moment we do not show

> this accurately. When the register is off, we show the user a fake zero

Reviewer: It's easy for the documentation to become out of date, so I'd recommend dropping the "At the moment we do not show this accurately" and everything afterwards.

Further question: Do you think LLDB should handle all such registers like this the same way as a policy? If so, write down that policy here.

Author: Good question but I have a feeling I got away with this tactic once and will have to implement a proper solution one day. So I don't want to make it policy.

For instance if you had 2 execution modes where you could not use certain registers at all, showing them as zeros is not ideal. You could teach users what it means, but it's not great.

....in fact maybe I should start with that generic scenario instead.

And remove the "at the moment" part as you suggested.

Author: I rephrased so the SME example is the one instance we've had a bit like this, and then said what might need proper support for it.

In the sense that, this example it was ok to fake it, for your target it might not make sense.

* Arm (Armv7 and prior) with Arm (32-bit), Thumb 1 (16-bit) and Thumb 2
  (a mix of 16 and 32-bit).
* RISC-V which is variable, usually 32-bit or the 16-bit compressed
  instructions.
* AArch64 which is fixed length, always 32-bit.

### Hardware Breakpoints and Watchpoints

Breakpoints can be implemented in software by replacing an instruction with a
software breakpoint instruction.

However, if you want to only stop in certain situations (a single address space,
a single execution mode, and so on), hardware breakpoints will be much faster.

Doing this in software means you have to return into the debugger to filter
every stop event. Which is slow even when locally debugging. Put the debug
server on the end of a high latency connection and the slow down is multiplied.

In addition, hardware breakpoints can be set in read-only memory. Which is
important for code executing out of ROM, common on embedded targets.

:::{note}
LLDB still has to be taught how to program hardware breakpoints, and this work
has not been done completely for all targets. This generally comes down to
demand. If it would be faster but the use case is rare, it is unlikely to be
supported.
:::

> Watchpoints pretty much have to be implemented in hardware because the software

Reviewer: You've been using `hardware breakpoint` instead of `watchpoint` up until now. I'd recommend noting that this is how LLDB refers to hardware breakpoints for the uninitiated.

Author: Is it? :rofl: 

I actually prefer to say "code breakpoint" most of the time but for whatever reason I did not here. I will make it clear up front what "breakpoint" relates to.

Author: I've put "code breakpoint" and also said what the "watch" in watchpoint means. This should clear it up.

situations users will have to figure out which watch or breakpoints to manually
disable so that they can continue.

### Addresses That Are More Than Just Numbers

Though many programming languages have rules that prevent the use of pointers
in some integer-like ways, the reality is that a lot of hardware treats them
as numbers.

This changes with capabilities (for example CHERI), mode bits (Arm's Thumb) and
re-use of non-address bits (AArch64's TBI, MTE and PAC). A pointer is no longer
just a number that refers to a memory location, it contains extra information.

Where the size of the pointer is equal to the bit width of the architecture
(64-bit pointers on AArch64 for example), LLDB can probably handle it. LLDB
already has the concept of "non-address bits" that must be removed to get the
memory address from a pointer.

If pointers are like capabilities where their size is greater than that of
a memory address, you will need to change the type LLDB uses to store addresses
which is a lot more work.

### Multiple Address Spaces

At this time LLDB does not support multiple address spaces. Work is ongoing to

> add them, with WASM and GPU targets as the main motivation.

Reviewer: While I generally think it's not a good idea to talk about what's going on in LLDB "right now" (because such things tend to be out of date) I think this might be okay to do for the time being.

Author: Given your earlier comment, I think I will reduce this to just saying that this adds some complexity. That will be true today and in future even with proper support in lldb for it.

Author: I've removed it. This is a non-exhaustive list anyway and address spaces are a very obvious thing they'll come across naturally.

correctly compare addresses, place breakpoints and use the correct breakpoint
instruction encoding.

In Arm's case, the information comes from markers in the program file, and the
bottom bit of the program counter. This is often a source of bugs because many
parts of the debugger have to know that this bit is not part of the instruction
address.

### Variable Length Instruction Encoding

LLDB already supports a wide variety of encoding strategies, so variable length
encoding is not much more work than fixed length.

Of the current targets we have:
* Intel which is variable length.
* Arm (Armv7 and prior) with Arm (32-bit), Thumb 1 (16-bit) and Thumb 2
  (a mix of 16 and 32-bit).
* RISC-V which is variable, usually 32-bit or the 16-bit compressed
  instructions.
* AArch64 which is fixed length, always 32-bit.

### Hardware Breakpoints and Watchpoints

Code breakpoints can be implemented in software by replacing an instruction with
a software breakpoint instruction.

However, if you want to only stop in certain situations (a single address space,
a single execution mode, and so on), code breakpoints implemented in hardware
will be much faster.

> Doing it in software means you have to return into the debugger to filter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Doing it in software means you have to context switch between the stub and the debugger to filter
```

Author: Done.
